docs(draft): add IPC tutorial (#145)
electron/electronjs.org-new: docs/latest/tutorial/ipc.md

native API from your UI or triggering changes in your web contents from native menus.

## IPC channels

In Electron, processes communicate by passing messages through developer-defined "channels"
with the [`ipcMain`][ipc-main] and [`ipcRenderer`][ipc-renderer] modules. These channels are
**arbitrary** (you can name them anything you want) and **bidirectional** (you can use the
same channel name for both modules).

In this guide, we'll be going over some fundamental IPC patterns with concrete examples that
you can use as a reference for your app code.

[ipc-main]: ../api/ipc-main.md
[ipc-renderer]: ../api/ipc-renderer.md

## Understanding context-isolated processes

Before proceeding to implementation details, you should be familiar with the idea of using a
[preload script] to import Node.js and Electron modules in a context-isolated renderer process.

* For a full overview of Electron's process model, you can read the [process model docs].
* For a primer into exposing APIs from your preload script using the `contextBridge` module, check
out the [context isolation tutorial].

[preload script]: process-model.md#preload-scripts
[process model docs]: process-model.md

> [context isolation tutorial]: context-isolation.md

Reviewer: Once the guide is OK can we move all the label links at the bottom of the doc?
I've had some issues when refactoring the docs in the tutorials and updating to new references.

```html {11-12} title='index.html'
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <!-- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP -->
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy" content="default-src 'self'; script-src 'self'">
    <title>Hello World!</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    Title: <input id="title"/>
    <button id="btn" type="button">Set</button>
    <script src="./renderer.js"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

To make these elements interactive, we'll be adding a few lines of code in the imported
`renderer.js` file that leverages the `window.electronAPI` functionality exposed from the preload
script:

```javascript title='renderer.js (Renderer Process)'
const setButton = document.getElementById('btn')
const titleInput = document.getElementById('title')
setButton.addEventListener('click', () => {
    const title = titleInput.value
    window.electronAPI.setTitle(title)
});
```

At this point, your demo should be fully functional. Try using the input field and see what happens
to your BrowserWindow title!

## Pattern 2: Renderer to main (two-way)

A common application for two-way IPC is calling a main process module from your renderer process

> code and waiting for a result. This can be done easily by using [`ipcRenderer.invoke`] paired with

Reviewer 2: scratch "easily"?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code and waiting for a result. This can be done by using [`ipcRenderer.invoke`] paired with
```

[`ipcMain.handle`].

In the following example, we'll be opening a native file dialog from the renderer process and
returning the selected file's path.

For this demo, you'll need to add code to your main process, your renderer process, and a preload
script. The full code is below, but we'll be explaining each file individually in the following
sections.

```fiddle docs/latest/fiddles/ipc/pattern-2
```

[`ipcRenderer.invoke`]: ../api/ipc-renderer.md#ipcrendererinvokechannel-args
[`ipcMain.handle`]: ../api/ipc-main.md#ipcmainhandlechannel-listener

### 1. Listen for events with `ipcMain.handle`

In the main process, we'll be creating a `handleFileOpen()` function that calls
`dialog.showOpenDialog` and returns the value of the file path selected by the user. This function

> is used as a callback whenever an `ipcRender.invoke` message is sent through the `dialog:openFile`

Reviewer 2: Might be nice to add a small comment at this point how `foo:bar` is a pattern used to "namespace" channel names, but that the `:` itself is not special and doesn't change the behavior.

    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <!-- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP -->
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy" content="default-src 'self'; script-src 'self'">
    <title>Dialog</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <button type="button" id="btn">Open a File</button>
    File path: <strong id="filePath"></strong>
    <script src='./renderer.js'></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

The UI consists of a single `#btn` button element that will be used to trigger our preload API, and
a `#filePath` element that will be used to display the path of the selected file. Making these
pieces work will take a few lines of code in the renderer process script:

```javascript title='renderer.js (Renderer Process)'
const btn = document.getElementById('btn')
const filePathElement = document.getElementById('filePath')

btn.addEventListener('click', async () => {
  const filePath = await window.electronAPI.openFile()
  filePathElement.innerText = filePath
})
```

In the above snippet, we listen for clicks on the `#btn` button, and call our
`window.electronAPI.openFile()` API to activate the native Open File dialog. We then display the
selected file path in the `#filePath` element.

> ### Note: alternative approaches

Reviewer: From what I'm reading none of the other approaches are recommended. Should we really document them?
IPC is already a hard topic, if we add multiple ways of doing things maybe we risk confusing them?

Author: I think it's important to note, especially since the APIs aren't deprecated and people might wonder about the difference between all the different methods.

Reviewer: From what I've seen developers have a hard time getting their head around IPC (with reason!). Anything we can do to make it easier for them the better and I think that mentioning only the recommended approaches is better to set them up for success.
If you feel really strong about documenting all approaches, maybe we can move this down the doc and rename it to something like "Non-recommended alternative approaches"?

Author: I wouldn't move it to a different spot because these examples apply specifically for this pattern, but I think it's a good idea to change the wording here to dissuade people from taking these approaches.

The `ipcRenderer.invoke` API was added in Electron 7 as a developer-friendly way to tackle two-way
IPC from the renderer process. However, there exist a couple alternative approaches to this IPC
pattern.

:::info
For the following examples, we're calling `ipcRenderer` directly from the preload script to keep
the code samples small.
:::

#### Using `ipcRenderer.send`

The `ipcRenderer.send` API that we used for single-way communication can also be leveraged to
perform two-way communication. This was the recommended way for asynchronous two-way communication
via IPC prior to Electron 7.

```javascript title='preload.js (Preload Script)'
// You can also put expose this code to the renderer
// process with the `contextBridge` API
const { ipcRenderer } = require('electron')

ipcRenderer.on('asynchronous-reply', (_event, arg) => {
  console.log(arg) // prints "pong" in the DevTools console
})
ipcRenderer.send('asynchronous-message', 'ping')
```

```javascript title='main.js (Main Process)'
ipcMain.on('asynchronous-message', (event, arg) => {
  console.log(arg) // prints "ping" in the Node console

>   event.reply('asynchronous-reply', 'pong')

Reviewer 2: Add a short note on how `reply` works? (even if it's "the same as send, but...")

`asynchronous-message` one. If you have very frequent messages going back and forth through these
channels, you would need to add additional app code to track each call and response individually.

#### Using `ipcRenderer.sendSync`

The `ipcRenderer.sendSync` API sends a message to the main process and waits _synchronously_ for a
response.

```javascript title='main.js (Main Process)'
const { ipcMain } = require('electron')
ipcMain.on('synchronous-message', (event, arg) => {
  console.log(arg) // prints "ping" in the Node console
  event.returnValue = 'pong'
})
```
```javascript title='preload.js (Preload Script)'
// You can also put expose this code to the renderer
// process with the `contextBridge` API
const { ipcRenderer } = require('electron')

const result = ipcRenderer.sendSync('synchronous-message', 'ping')
console.log(result) // prints "pong" in the DevTools console
```

The structure of this code is very similar to the `invoke` model, but we recommend
**avoiding this API** for performance reasons. Its synchronous nature means that it'll block the
renderer process until a reply is received.

## Pattern 3: Main to renderer

> When sending messages from the main process to the renderer process, there is no direct equivalent
> to `ipcRenderer.send` in the `ipcMain` module. Messages need to be sent to individual [WebContents]
> instances because you can have more than one renderer in your Electron app and you might have web
> embeds running in any given renderer.

Reviewer: We are talking about main process, renderer process, WebContents, modules, and saying there is no direct equivalent (although it is just in a module). This can be a bit scary for someone not familiar. 
What do you think of something around the following (there's probably a better way to phrase it, this is just to give an idea):

```suggestion
In an Electron application there is only one main process, but there can be multiple renderer processes.
Messages are sent to individual renderer process via its [WebContents] instance and the `send` method, making the
call similar to `mainWindow.webContents.send`
```

exposed from our preload script. The second `value` parameter corresponds to the `1` or `-1` we
were passing in from the `webContents.send` call from the native menu.

### Optional: returning a reply

There's no equivalent for `ipcRenderer.invoke` for main-to-renderer IPC. Instead, you can
send a reply back to the main process from within the `ipcRenderer.on` callback.

We can demonstrate this with slight modifications to the code from the previous example. In the
renderer process, use the `event` parameter to send a reply back to the main process through the
`counter-value` channel.

```javascript title='renderer.js (Renderer Process)'
const counter = document.getElementById('counter')

window.electronAPI.onUpdateCounter((event, value) => {
  const oldValue = Number(counter.innerText)
  const newValue = oldValue + value
  counter.innerText = newValue
  event.reply('counter-value', newValue)
})
```

In the main process, listen for `counter-value` events and handle them appropriately.

```javascript title='main.js (Main Process)'
//...
ipcMain.on('counter-value', (_event, value) => {
  console.log(value) // will print value to Node console
})
//...
```

## Limitations of IPC

> ### Object serialization

Reviewer: I would remove the title `## Limitations of IPC` and move this up.

Author: > move this up.

As in `## Object serialization`, or change its position in the doc (or both)?

Reviewer: As in `## Object serialization` 😊

For performance reasons, Electron's IPC implementation uses the HTML standard
[Structured Clone Algorithm][sca] to serialize objects passed between processes, meaning that
only certain types of files can be passed through IPC channels.

This was a breaking change introduced in Electron 8. From our [Breaking Changes] doc:

> In particular, DOM objects (e.g. `Element`, `Location` and `DOMMatrix`), Node.js objects
> backed by C++ classes (e.g. `process.env`, some members of `Stream`), and Electron objects
> backed by C++ classes (e.g. `WebContents`, `BrowserWindow` and `WebFrame`) are not serializable

> > with Structured Clone.

Reviewer: Could these type of objects be sent before? I thought before the messages were JSON strings so I wouldn't expect many of those be also serializable. Am I wrong?

I'd like this to read this under a more possitive lens. What about doing something like:

-  We used JSON string earlier so we switched to SCA that bring a perf boost. That said not everything can be sent: DOM objects, Node.js objects...
- Remove the breaking change mention. Electron 8 is way in the past

Author: > Could these type of objects be sent before? I thought before the messages were JSON strings so I wouldn't expect many of those be also serializable. Am I wrong?

From the breaking changes doc, it seems like these were serializable up to Electron 9:
> Sending any objects that aren't native JS types, such as DOM objects (e.g. Element, Location, DOMMatrix), Node.js objects (e.g. process.env, Stream), or Electron objects (e.g. WebContents, BrowserWindow, WebFrame) is deprecated. In Electron 8, these objects will be serialized as before with a DeprecationWarning message, but starting in Electron 9, sending these kinds of objects will throw a 'could not be cloned' error.

Reviewer: Thanks for digging this up.
I still think we should remove the quote from the breaking changes and just mention what type of objects aren't cloneable.

[sca]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Structured_clone_algorithm
[breaking changes]: ../breaking-changes.md

> ### Renderer-to-renderer communication

Reviewer: What do you think of moving this a level up as a pattern?
At the end what developers want to know is how to communicate different process regardless of what module is being used.

Author: I wouldn't mind. As an aside, it'd probably be good to put more detail into this section in the future.

There's no direct way to send messages between renderer processes in Electron using the `ipcMain`
and `ipcRenderer` modules. To achieve this, you have two options:

* Use the main process as a message broker between renderers. This would involve sending a message
from one renderer to the main process, which would forward the message to the other renderer.

> * Pass a [MessagePort] from the main process to both renderers.

Reviewer: Maybe mention that MessagePort should be a more efficient because it avoids the jump through main?
